this is DW news live from Berlin a new
sea Corridor to bring desperately needed
Aid to Gaza the Open Arms supply vessel
is cleared to sail carrying humanitarian
supplies from Cyprus our correspondent
reports from inside the control room at
the Port of
lanica voting closes in Portugal with
the far right set to make election gains
corruption scandals have dented support
for mainstream
parties
[Music]
[Applause]
hello I'm Tomy alad welcome to the
program a ship loaded with humanitarian
Aid has been given the all clear to set
sail from Cyprus to Gaza the Open Arms
supply vessel is expected to leave the
port of lanaka any moment now carrying
200 tons of rice flour and proteins to
Gaza The Chariot World Central Kitchen
is providing the assistance it'll take
the vessel an estimated 60 hours to
reach Gaza once it set sale using a
newly established Maritime Aid
Corridor our correspondent Rosie berad
is in lanica Cyprus where that shipment
of Aid is expected to depart anytime
now we at a special operations Hub in
the city of larica where cypriate
officials are able to track and look at
this new Maritime Corridor which is now
really starting from here in the city of
larica so that Aid boats can reach Gaza
safely and that much needed maiden
voyage we understand should be setting
off very soon so in this room around me
you'll see there are cameras where
officials can monitor what's happening
at the Port we also see for example lots
of maps that shows the area where
cypriate officials could deploy for
example search and rescue vessels if
this ship were to get into distress now
I've been speaking with seprate
officials I've got the very latest from
them take a listen to what they had to
say we have uh finished the inspection
and loading of the vessel of the Open
Arms vessel uh and the platform they are
using so uh the most important part is
that everything is uh ready uh
permissions have been granted and now
it's uh scheduling um
issue for uh the NGO that uh is handling
this
issue Rosie um just talking about the
scheduling issue there do we have an
idea of the exact time uh when this is
uh going to get the all
clear in the coming hours what I
understand is that the NGO which is
preparing to receive this Aid on the
gazan side is still busy building its
temporary peer in order order to
actually receive this now this is a
first ofit kind delivery it's a delivery
of tons hundreds of tons I've been told
of things like flour of rice of protein
like canned tuna and of course we know
that is much needed in Gaza where there
really is a humanitarian disaster and
officials here are hoping they can ramp
up this Corridor over the next few weeks
to see to this Voyage really seen as a
test for trying to get this done the
idea is that cypriate officials check
the goods here in Cyprus o overseen by
Israeli officials before it departs so
that they can go directly to Gaza now we
are however hearing from United Nations
officials saying this Maritime Corridor
while it's welcome news is no
replacement for land access and so those
calls to increase access into Gaza via
traditional land Crossings are still
mounting particularly from the United
Nations and Ros we just uh looking there
um earlier as you were speaking to live
looking at live images of of the vessel
there we have the images of the vessel
um how long is it likely to take to get
to its destination and deliver what uh
these desperately needed
Aid so Cyprus is the point in the
European Union which is the closest to
Gaza but it's still some 400 km so make
no mistake this is not an easy journey
and generally this should take about 15
hours so at least a full day of sailing
but given the fact that this boat is
tugging a a heavy cargo it could be that
takes much longer certainly into a
couple of days so this is no mean feat
and certainly something as you can see
the eyes of cpri officials bearing down
on this to try and make sure this works
because of course as we know really the
lives are at stake here the United
Nations has been warning of famine in
Gaza I should say that Israel says it
facilitates the access of Aid Israel has
welcomed this initiative although Israel
has also faced criticism particularly
for ngos for what they say really is
that lack of humanitarian access and how
difficult it has been to get life-saving
Aid into the besieged territory as DW
correspondent Rosie Bard in lanica
Cyprus now efforts to secure ceasefire
in Gaza before the start of Ramadan have
stalled war and hunger are overshadowing
the eve of the Muslim holy month Aid
agencies say International efforts to
ramp up deliveries of humanitarian
supplies by air and now by sea are not
effective
enough in parts of Gaza
Ramadan decorations and food are still
available but not at prices most people
can
afford there are no jobs left no water
and no
electricity people are selling their
belongings to
live and Ramadan is very hard on
us for most Palestinians food to break
ramadan's daily fasting will be hard to
come
by we rarely eat whether it is Ramadan
or
not and we always remain
hungry in Rafa parents are getting
creative to help children
celebrate Ramadan is Ramadan is very
different this year we're not in our
homes we're intense but we insisted on
putting up decorations and cele
we just pray that by the end of Ramadan
we'll be in our
homes others find the fighting between
Hamas and Israeli forces too much to
bear children reportedly injured in an
Israeli bombing are rushed to the
hospital in this Central Gaza
Strip ongoing Israeli air strikes are
also taking a psychological
tool we are tired I swear where please
feel for us please we want a ceasefire
and an end to this what do we have to
say we'd thank God for
anything without a ceasefire in time for
Ramadan and an Israeli ground assault
into Rafa still a possibility the
suffering of ordinary Palestinians
continues without relief in
sight let's check in on some other
stories making headlines around the
world NATO has begun biggest exercise
and say the cold war in the fields of
Northern Norway the alliance wants to
send a message to Russia that me member
states are ready to defend each other
more than 20,000 troops from 13 nations
are taking part in the
drills Germany's GLD gdl train drivers
Union has announced another 24-hour
strike on Tuesday talks with Railway
operator Deutsche Bank man uh deutche
band management remain Deadlock the
sixth workout walkout in current
negotiations is set to start at 2:00
a.m. local time for passenger
Services voting has closed in elections
in Portugal exit poles show a shift to
the right as in other European nations
in recent polls Portugal's had eight
years of socialist rule but the far
right party shager is picking up
significant support confidence in
mainstream politicians has been dented
by corruption
scandals DW's Yan Philip Schultz is in
Lisbon for us Yan Philip the polling
stations closing just minutes ago do we
have early
results yes according to first uh exit
polls uh it is a tight race between the
ruling socialists and the center right
opposition but it looks as if the center
right democratic iance the main
opposition block is a few percentage
points ahead and could maybe form the
next government also the farri right
populist uh party the chga party they
have gained uh um quite considerably
they are at around 16 to
19% uh this was predicted but it's still
a very strong um result for the far
right um there are uh also some good
news the participation of the voters the
voter turnout seems to be uh quite high
but I have to stress again those are
just first exit pole projections
here uh in that case what do we expect
uh this do do we see a kind of trend
that could shape up for the new
government well it will certainly be
difficult to form a new government and
Portugal none of the major parties seem
to have the necessary majority uh so at
the end uh the far right populist chga
party could become something like a king
maker for the center right block even
though a lot of politicians from the
moderate center right parties uh have
stressed that they uh don't want to have
a deal with chga but this could be um
the only o option maybe at the moment if
uh if the country is not going to have
fresh elections in a few months all
right we'll be waiting to see how that
develops Yan Philip Schultz in Lisbon
thank you very
much finally Earthbound stars of the
Oscars may have some competition new
images from the James web Space
Telescope show the star forming region
called NGC 604 it's located in the
Triangular Galaxy nearly 3 million light
years from Earth the James web telescope
allows astronomers to study star
clusters in their early
formation and back here on Earth that's
all we have time for but coming up next
after the break Sports life and from
myself and the team Thank you very
very much for
watching